# Chapter 13: Configuring Logging 

There sre 3 approaches to writing logs:
- **systemd-journald:** drfault for logging 
- **direct write**: some services write logs directly to lig files
- **rsyslog**

`systemd-journald` provides advanced log management. Collects messages from the kernel, boot processes and services and writes these messages to an event journal.

`journalctl` enables you to access a deep level of detail about messages that are logged. Integrated part of Systemd and receives messages generated by Shstemd units. 

**rsyslogd** is a logging service that has more features than journald, such as centralized logging and filtering messages based on modules. Writes log info to soecific files taht will be persistent between reboots. 

Admins use 3 approached to knoe more about what's happening on the machine:
1. `journalctl`: command to get detailed info from the journal

2. `systemctl status <unit> -l` gets the status of services and the most recent log entries which are significant

3. **rsyslogd**: monitor the files I. */var/log* which are written by rsyslogd. 

#### System log files

*/var/log/messages* contains generic lig file where most msgs are written to. Most commonly used log file. 

*/var/log/dmseg* contains kernel message logs. 

*/var/log/secure* contains authentication-related msgs. Shows whxih auth errors have ovcured on a server. 

*/var/log/boot.log* contains msgs relating to system start up. (Check this on the machine) 

*/var/log/audit/audit.log* contains audit messages. SELinux writes to this file. 

*/var/log/maillog* contains mail related messages 

*/var/log/httpd/* contains log foles written by Apache web server. Apache writes directly to this file, not through rsyslog. 

To read the contents of a log file, you can use the `less` pager utility. 

`tail -f <logfile>` view real time log messages that are added (in real time)

`logger` allows users to write messages from the command line or a script. Able to specify priority and facility here. 

`systemctl-journald` stores log msgs in the journal. The journal is a binary file that is temporarily being stored in /run/log/journal.

Journal can be examined using `journalctl`. 

`journalctl` manages and views system logs collected by the systemd-journald service. 
- provides access to logs from the kernel, srrvices, applications and system
- loss can be filtered based on services, time range or priorities
- automatically uses `less` pager 

`journalctl -f` shows last/end of log msgs where new lines were added automatically. 

Search options **/** and **?** work in journalctl. Type **G** to go to the end of the msgs. 

`journalctl -o verbose` shows very detailed info that helps with debugging. 

**journalctl time ranges:**
- for a specific time period, use `--since` or/and `--until`
- time parameter format: **YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss**
- can use *yesterday, today* and *tomorrow* as parameters 
- *Ex:* `journalctl --since yesterday`

`journalctl -n 20` shows the last 20 lines of the journal

**journalctl options:**
- **-f** shows the end of the journal and adds real time messages as they are generated. 
- **-b** shows boot log
- **-x** adds additional explanation to the messages shown which makes it easier to understand
- **-u** filter log msgs for a specific unit. *Ex:* `journalctl -u sshd`. 
- **-p** filters messages with a specific priority. *Ex:* `journalctl -p warn` displays all warning logs 

Journal is stored in **/run/log/journal**. 
The */run* directory is used for current process stats only, meaning the journal gets wiped when a system reboots. To make the journal persistent, store it in **/var/log/journal**.

**systemd-journald**
- the logging daemon that gathers and manages logs 
- runs as a background process
- can be managed with `systemctl`

**systemd-journal**
- utility for querying, viewing and interacting with logo
- provides tools like `journalctl` to access and analyze log data 

**rsyslog** allows you to manage where and how info should be written in with the */etc/rsyslog.conf* file

<br/>

**rsyslog.conf file sections** 

- **facility**
    - a category of info that is logged which can't be extended or changed 
    - *Ex:* cron, kernel, user, etc. 
    - **local 0-7**: if services don’t have their own rsyslog facility and need to log messages to a specific file, they can use this. 
        - this needs to be configured for the specific service. Need to add a rule in rsyslog.conf
- **priority**
    - defines the severity of the message that needs to be logged
    - when you specify a priority, all messages with that priority and higher priorities will be logged
    - *Ex:* err, debug, info, panic, crit, etc.
- **Destination**
    - defines where the messages should be written; a path
    - *Ex:* /var/log/messages

** **`man 5 rsyslog.conf` and `man rsyslog.conf` lists all facilities and priorites of rsyslog.**

<br/>

To prevent syslog msgs from filling up your system, you can **rotate** them.
- When a threshold has been reached, the old log file is closed and a new one is created.
- When a log file is rotated, the old file is copied to a file that has the rotation date on it
- 4 old log files like this are kept on the system and anything after is removed automatically.
- most important setting in */etc/logrotate.conf* is how often it says to rotate the files (weekly, etc.)

<br/>


### Do you already know? Questions

1. systemd-journald is **not** a replacement of rsyslogd.

2. Authentication related messages are written to */var/log/secure*.

3. */var/log/audit/audit.log* stores info relating to SELinux.

4. */var/log/journal* stores systemd journal persistently.

5. To make systemd journal persistent, create the **/var/log/journal** file (`mkdir /var/log/journal`), set the appropriate permissions (`chown root:systemd-journal /var/log/journal`, `chmod 2755 /var/log/journal`), then restart the journal (`systemctl restart systemd systemd-journal-flush`).

6. `systemctl restart systemd-journal-flush` updates systemd journal to use the updated configuration.

7. `/etc/rsyslog.conf` is the rsyslogd config file.

8. **:modulename:** is the format for rsyslogd modules.

9. **local0-local7** can be used to configure services that don't use rsyslog by default. 

10. The logrotate service can be configured to maximize a file size of a log to 10mb. This can be done in its corresponding config file. For example, */etc/logrotate.d/example* is for */var.log/example.log*.


### Review Questions

1. */erc/rsyslog.conf* is used to configure rsyslogd.

2. */var/log/secure* contains logs and messages relating to authentication.

3. If not configured, log files are rotated away by default after 5 weeks - one week for the currently file and 4 weeks for old files. 

4. `logger -p user.notice "text"` logs a msg fromt he command line to the user facility, with the notice priority.

5. `*.info /var/log/messages.info` writes all messages with a priority of "info" to that file.

6. The */etc/systemd/journald.conf* file can be configured to grow beyond its default size. 

7. `journalctl -xb` shows boot log messages (-b) with an explanation (-x).

8. `journalctl _PID=1 --since 9:00:00 --until 15:00:00` shows all journald for PID 1 between 9am and 3pm. The _ is needed so the system knows the real process id to look at.

9. `journalctl -u sshd` shows all messages that were logged for the sshd service. You can use `systemctl status sshd` to see the last few lines of the logs. 

10. **To make the systemd jounral persistent:**
- `mkdir /var/log/journal`
- `chown root:systemd-journal /var/log/journal`
- `chmod 2755 /var/log/journal`
- `systemctl restart systemd systemd-journal-flush`

